The [**Two Sum**](https://leetcode.com/problems/two-sum/description/) problem is deceptively simple, or atleast for me.

> Given an array of integers nums and an integer target, return indices of the two numbers such that they add up to target. 
> You may assume that each input would have exactly one solution, and you may not use the same element twice.
> You can return the answer in any order.
>
> Example 1:
>   Input: nums = [2,7,11,15], target = 9
>   Output: [0,1]
>   Explanation: Because nums[0] + nums[1] == 9, we return [0, 1].
> Example 2:
>   Input: nums = [3,2,4], target = 6
>   Output: [1,2]
> Example 3:
>   Input: nums = [3,3], target = 6
>   Output: [0,1]
>
> Constraints:
>   2 <= nums.length <= 104
>   -109 <= nums[i] <= 109
>   -109 <= target <= 109
>   Only one valid answer exists.

In short, you are given an array of numbers and need to find a pair of numbers from the array that adds up to the target value. Immediately, I can imagine two approaches to solving this problem:
- For each number in the array, you could add the current element with one other element in the array and see if it matches with the target value (if not, then iterate through the array until you do find a match or not); however, there is another way that I prefer:
- Imagine for a second, you had no knowledge of programming. How would a normal person try to solve this? A clever individual might select a number from the array and subtract it from the target value; then, they would try to find a value in the array that matches with the result of that subtraction (repeat until a match is found).
