> In reference to [[2407250121]], why can't you just implement MFA?

Among the methods for MFA (biometric, hardware tokens, authenticator apps, etc.), 2FA with authenticator apps [^1] is a good middle ground between security and convenience [^2]. However, it's important to ensure good security practices on the hosting device, as soft tokens produced by authenticator apps can be vulnerable should the device be compromised.

Regardless, implementing 2FA is a low-hanging fruit that offers significant improvements to server security. In cases of password authentication, 2FA can effectively mitigate brute-force attacks. While it doesn't completely prevent such attacks, as the 2FA code can still be guessed, it adds an additional layer of security. Between key-based and password-based authentication, a malicious actor might gain knowledge of the username and password with relative ease. In such scenarios, 2FA becomes the last line of defense in preventing unauthorized access to the server when using the password-based + 2FA combination.

While 2FA is an effective approach to hardening the SSH server [^3], its effectiveness diminishes if any component of the authentication process is left vulnerable. On the other hand, key-based authentication can further reduce the likelihood of unauthorized access to the SSH server and eliminates the need to enter a username/password, thus improving convenience [^2]. However, I will refrain from implementing 2FA on top of key-based authentication while my server remains a low-priority target.

[^1]: Authenticator apps are always preferable over SMS or email for 2FA, as SMS and email are vulnerable to man-in-the-middle attacks.
[^2]: This is a good instance of trying to find a balance between availability and security [[2406041921]]. While it would be easy to prioritize security completely, in a corporate or university setting, not everyone will have the technical knowledge or understanding that certain inconveniences are necessary for security. Often, individuals may compromise current security practices for a bit more convenience.
[^3]: The `ssh` server that is being alluded to may be found in [[2407071505]].