In continuation of my home server project [^1], now that I have a minimal server, I would like to be able to remotely access it as well — specifically, I want to set up an SSH server. Due to opting for a minimal installation, the familiar tools I am used to were not available. This required me to manually install the tools myself and do a bit of research on my own. Coming from Arch, this wasn't a tall task, but it was a fun learning experience.

First, I needed to get into root to install the necessary packages that I would be needing:
```
$ su -
password: []

```
[^2]

In addition to installing `sudo` [^3], it is likely that I will need:
- `net-tools`. a collection of program that are useful for diagnosing and controlling the network subsystem of the Linux kernel (e.g. `ifconfig`, `netstat`, etc.).
- `ufw`. a user-friendly framework for managing `netfilter` [^4].
- `openssh-server`. is useful for remotely controlling computers across a network and transferring data between them.
```
$ apt update
...
$ apt install sudo net-tools ufw openssh-server
...

```

Since I was already in root, I also wanted to add a user into sudoers group as it is common to have an admin user rather than launching into root everytime something needs to be done [^3].
```
$ useradd -aG sudo "theUser"
$ systemctl restart      # this is to enact changes, should it be needed
```


Now that all the packages that I need have been instead, it would be good to check that the `sshd` service is actve/enabled, which may be checked with:
```
$ sudo systemctl status sshd
...
```

After finding that my intervention would not be needed, it was time to lightly configure `ssh` server. I wanted to make sure that it isn't possible to access root through `ssh` and to ensure that `ssh` was using its typical port 22. As mentioned in [this article](https://devconnected.com/how-to-install-and-enable-ssh-server-on-debian-10/), there are two config files:
> - `ssh_config`: defines SSH rules for clients. It means that it defines rules that are applied everytime you use SSH to connect to a remote host or to transfer files between hosts;
> - `sshd_config`: defines SSH rules for your SSH server. It is used for example to define the reachable SSH port or to deny specific users from communicating with your server. 
```
$ sudo vi /etc/ssh/sshd_config
```

While in the file, I needed to be sure that `port 22` was uncommentted (this is `ssh`'s default port, usually) and that `PermitRootLogin` uncommented and set to `no`:
```
...
port 22
...
PermitRootLogin no
...
```

Afterwards, it may be prudent to restarted the `sshd` service to ensure that my changes were applied:
```
$ sudo systemctl restart sshd
$ sudo systemctl status sshd
```

Now that the `ssh` server was configured, I needed to enable the firewall, which I discovered in [this article](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/initial-server-setup-with-debian-10), and allow connections to port 22. It would also be worth noting that `ufw`'s configuration file may be found at `/etc/default/ufw`; however, for this instance, I don't think there was a need to change the defaults.
```
$ sudo ufw enable
$ sudo ufw status
...
$ sudo ufw allow ssh
Rules updated
Rules updated (v6)
```

At this point, all of the basic necessities have been configured and enabled; it time to see the results. First, I would need the servers IP which would be found through `ifconfig`:
```
$ sudo ifconfig
...
```

After finding the IP address from `ifconfig`'s output, I tried to `ssh` into the server with a different device.
```
$ ssh -p <port> <username>@<ip_address>
```

It then asked for the user's password, which I inputted, and SUCCESS. It works beautifully.


[^1]: The project being reference may be found here [[2407070014]], it describes my experience with the installation process.
[^2]: The reason for the `-` after `su` is to invoke a login shell. This may be preferable for certain tools because otherwise, for some tools, the shell will not recognize the called tools. [This StackExchange link](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/7013/why-do-we-use-su-and-not-just-su) further explains why `su -` is used.
[^3]: I would like to come back here another time; aside from `sudo`, there is also `doas` that I would like to explore. Additionally, why not just use `su`?
[^4]: I think I would like to look into this some other time whenever I can.
