*malware* = wide range of software desgined with intention to cause harm; may also gather info., provide illicit access, and other actions not intended by sys./net. owner [^1]
- ransomware - takes over computer or system assets and extorts the user for money; typically driven by phishing attacks
    - inidcators of compromise (IOC): 
        - command and control (C&C) traffic to an unknown IP addr
        - use of legit. tools in abnormal ways
        - lateral movement within a trust boundary
        - encryption of files
        - notice for demands of ransom
        - data exfiltration
    - one of the best responses is backups; some antimal. have tools to decrypt
- trojans - software masked to appear as legit softw.; compromise = up to the will of hacker subsequently
    - IOC:
        - abnormal folders or files created
        - C&C of hostname and IP
        - signature for specific malw. apps. or download files
    - awareness is important; restrict what may be downloaded by users; antimalw. and EDR may be used for id. and stop trojans
- worms - self-propogating malw. that injects itself into a sys. and spreads through any other means 
    - IOC:
        - known malw. files
        - C&C contact remote
        - keyboard activity
        - command exec.
        - download of additional components
    - firewalls, limited attack surface; depending on complexity, removal may be impossible
- spyware - malw. designed to obtain info. 
    - IOC, similar to many other malw.:
        - remote access and control indicators
        - known file fingerprints
        - malcicious processes
        - injection against browsers
    - awareness; not as high of a threat as others and my be categorized separately
- bloatware - unwanted additional software installed on a sys.; increases attack surface area
- viruses - malicious program that is self-replicating; typically have a trigger that determines when they send payload; traditionally fileless and requires existence of vulnerability
    - comes in varieties:
        - memory resident
        - non-memory resident
        - boot sector
        - macro
        - email
- keyloggers - record computer input
    - IOC:
        - file hashes and signatures
        - exfiltration
        - process names
        - known reference URLS
    - mitigation = typical best practices
- logic bombms - functions or code placed dormant in software and activates when a condition is met
    - IOC = less common
    - mitigation = code reviews
- rootkits - malware designed to allow user to access sys. backdoor; infected dev. cannot diagnose itself and requires external; designed to avoid detection
    - IOC:
        - file hashes and signatures
        - c&c domains, ip, and sys
        - abnormal behaviors
        - opening of ports or creation of reverse proxy tunnels

[^1]: the goal is to differentiate, id characteristics and IOC, and how to mitigate
