---
tags:
- " #compsci/AI "
- " #philosophy "
---


```ad-note
This node is in reference to this [article](https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LIX/236/433/986238?login=false#164226550) and is an attempt to dissect the base assumptions by Alan Turing concerning the imitation game.
```

> This should begin with definitions of the meaning of the terms ‘machine’ and ‘think’. The definitions might be framed so as to reflect so far as possible the normal use of the words, but this attitude is dangerous.

How are the common definitions of "machine" and "think" dangerous? In order to answer this question, you need to first determine the common definition of the terms.
?? 
- machine refers to a device that transforms energy into some form of automation, often as means for assisting human tasks.
- think depends on context but it generally refers to the human processing information. <!--SR:!2023-06-01,69,290!2023-06-04,53,274-->

> If the meaning of the words ‘machine’ and ‘think’ are to be found by examining how they are commonly used it is difficult to escape the conclusion that the meaning and the answer to the question, ‘Can machines think?’ is to be sought in a statistical survey such as a Gallup poll.

Historically, a machine was not commonly perceived beyond its station - that is, public perception of machines was that of enhancers of convenience. As a result, the question "can machines think?" would cause some ponder but does not request deep analysis. Alan Turing suggests a reinterpretation of sorts: can machine develop such that it is indistinguishable from humans? *Is what I interpret.*