# stack fundamentals
The **stack** is the hardware implementation of the *last in, first out (LIFO)* queue and is an arbitrary area within the RAM. It is primarily used for:
- storing function arguments
- storing local variables
- storing processor states between function calls

In computers, this is usually a specially treated region of memory.

## x86 stack logic
When thinking of a stack, it is typical to imagine a concept similar to a stack of dishes. However, in the x86 architecture, the stack is placed head down. The stack begins at a high address and grows 'downward' — meaning the top of the stack refers to the lowest address within the stack.[^1][^2] It is as follows:
```
high addr
     +----+
FFFF | xx | <--- bottom of the stack
FFFB | xx |
FFF7 | xx |
FFF3 | xx |
FFEF | xx |
FFEB | xx | <--- top of the stack
FFE7 | 00 |
FFE3 | 00 |
FFDF | 00 |
FFDB | 00 |
FFD7 | 00 |
     +----+
low addr
```

The register `esp`/`rsp` holds the address pointing to the top of the stack, which is why it is called the **stack pointer**, while `ebp`/`rbp` points to the base of the stack - hence, **base pointer**. When an item is pushed onto the stack, esp decrements by 4 (on 64-bit x86 systems, it decrements by 8) and stores the value at that location. The process is as follows:
```
     +----+
FFFF | xx | <--- $ebp
FFFB | xx |
FFF7 | xx |
FFF3 | xx |
FFEF | xx |
FFEB | xx |
FFE7 | dd | <--- $esp
FFE3 | 00 |
FFDF | 00 |
FFDB | 00 |
FFD7 | 00 |
     +----+
```

Conversely, during a `pop` operation, the value at `esp` is retrieved, and then `esp` is incremented by 4 (or 8).[^3]
```
     +----+
FFFF | xx | <--- $ebp
FFFB | xx |
FFF7 | xx |
FFF3 | xx |
FFEF | xx |
FFEB | xx | <--- $esp
FFE7 | dd |
FFE3 | 00 |
FFDF | 00 |
FFDB | 00 |
FFD7 | 00 |
     +----+
```

In addition, `$eip`, the **instruction pointer**, is responsible for keeping track of the memory address of the next instruction to be executed.

[^1]: [This article](https://eli.thegreenplace.net/2011/02/04/where-the-top-of-the-stack-is-on-x86/) explains extensively about the stack and is what I used to better understand the "top" and "bottom" of the stack.
[^2]: [This video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RU5vUIl1vRs) provides a visual for the stack that got everything to click for me.
[^3]: The value is not deleted outright because it's computationally expensive; it's easier to leave it alone to be eventually overwritten. However, it may be possible to exploit this.
