# basic encryption key concepts

In cryptography, an **encryption** key is a string of characters that, when used with an encryption algorithm, scrambles and alters data in a seemingly random way. Like a physical key, the data is sealed (encrypted) and can only be accessed when the correct key is used to unlock it (decrypted).[^1] [^2] [^3]

A plaintext is encrypted by a key to create a **ciphertext**.[^1] [^3]

```
plaintext + key = ciphertext
ciphertext - key = plaintext
```

## asymmetric cryptography

**Asymmetric encryption** involves generating two keys: a private key and a public key. The public key is shared with others, while the private key must be kept confidential.[^3]

The terms "private" and "public" are used to differentiate the two keys but are otherwise arbitrary; either key can be used as the private or public key, as long as their roles are consistent. What matters is that the keys are mathematically related. It is not algorithmically feasible to derive one key from the other. The keys are designed so that data encrypted with the public key can only be decrypted with the private key, and vice versa. The same key cannot be used for both encryption and decryption.

A visualization of asymmetric encryption:

```
1. Bob encrypts a plaintext using a public key provided by Alice (plaintext + public key = ciphertext) 
2. Bob sends the file to Alice
3. Alice receives the file and decrypts the ciphertext using Alice's private key (ciphertext - private key = plaintext)
```

## symmetric cryptography

**Symmetric encryption** involves cryptography that uses a single, shared key for both encryption and decryption. If the *shared secret* becomes known to unauthorized individuals, a new key must be created to maintain confidentiality.[^3]

Symmetric encryption is analogous to a physical key used in everyday life. The same key is used to both lock (encrypt) and unlock (decrypt) the door (encryption algorithm), securing the contents inside (data as ciphertext).[^1]

## additional topics to be explored

### combining asymmetric and symmetric cryptography

Symmetric keys can be used in conjunction with asymmetric keys. For example, Bob and Alice can each use their private keys to combine with the other’s public key, generating a shared symmetric key. This process, known as the **Diffie-Hellman key exchange**, ensures both parties have a common symmetric key without directly transmitting it.[^3]

### elliptic curve cryptography

Asymmetric encryption traditionally involves significant overhead due to the use of large integers and prime numbers, which require substantial storage and can result in slower data transfer across networks.[^3]

A more efficient alternative is **Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC)**, which leverages the algebraic structure of elliptic curves rather than large prime numbers. ECC offers a more compact key size and reduced computational load, making it particularly well-suited for resource-constrained devices like mobile phones. Notably, ECC is the foundation for the ed25519 signature scheme, known for its efficiency and strong security.[^4]

[^1]: [This article](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/ssl/what-is-a-cryptographic-key/) is what I used for my initial search into cryptographic keys. It provided a decent analogy and definition that make for a great mental hook as I learned about this topic.
[^2]: Encryption falls under the category of confidentiality in the CIA Triad, which aims to prevent unauthorized access to information [[2406041646]].
[^3]: Most of the content in this node draw from the information provided in [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6uRI4o5EUkI).
[^4]: [This wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EdDSA) indicates that ed25519's has its basis in elliptic curve cryptography.
